Hi everyone, welcome back. This is the
third lecture of the A section. Uh what
I want to accomplish today is to give
you an introduction to linear regression
from the basian perspective. And as I'm
going to try to convince you, uh there
are a couple of important things about
this. Uh the first is that linear
regression is originally basian. So I'm
not invading this topic. I'm just trying
to reexlain the history to you. And in
re-explaining that history, I want to
get across as a topline conceptual point
that the meaning of the estimates you
get from a linear regression
uh always depend upon some scientific
model external to the regression itself
and there's no avoiding that. So I'm
going to give you a simple example today
and in subsequent lectures we'll keep
building on that theme that building the
scientific model uh in tandem with the
statistical model so that we can have
some faith in the design of the
statistical model and interpret the
output in a scientific framework. Does
that make sense? Uh so I'll give you
some an example today um which you'll
will come back uh to us later in the
course as well. Um let me take a a quick
detour into the history though. I said
that linear regression is originally
basian. Uh I don't really care, but
maybe it'll help to give you some
perspective on the history of statistics
and make you a little bit more relaxed
about statistical methodology. That's my
goal at least is embed these things in
the history of them. Um basian
probability is older than frequentist
probability. Basian probability is old.
It's the old continental math, right?
And um it it uh our story intersects
with linear regression and ordinary le
squares and all that stuff um when it
comes to astronomy which is where a lot
of statistical methodology was
developed. This was for doing astronomy.
So there's this interesting phenomenon
um I think I have to start the animation
here. Yeah. So this is what you're going
to see here is a time-lapsed uh movie of
the sky with Mars at different points. I
think this is a month apart each
individual one. That's Mars every time.
And it goes across the sky from fixed
position. See the stars in the
background are staying still. They're
also moving but really slow, right? And
then Mars changes direction. This really
happens. Some of you here are an amateur
or even expert astronomers and you know
about this phenomenon. All the planets
do this. This is called retrograde
motion. Here comes Mars just wandering
back. So planet in Latin means wanderer.
Yeah. like plane flaneran in German same
root for the Germans in the room. It
means to wander and it's because they do
this and the the other stars don't. The
stars that wander are the planets. This
is really cool. I think this is a really
cool phenomenon. Um all the planets do
this to different degrees. Mars is the
most conspicuous because it's the
closest to us. Uh why does this happen?
And people who had nothing better to do
spent centuries trying to figure out why
this happens and it led to well figuring
out the structure of the solar system
and then the universe and all kinds of
other stuff came from that. Um the
earliest really successful models for
predicting this retrograde motion in the
sky were completely wrong. Yeah. but
extremely accurate in predicting and for
centuries or the millennia these sorts
of models called now called geocentric
models the most famous one by um a Greek
named Tammy uh uh uh were used for
centuries to predict where the the
planets are then the idea this is a
cartoon version of the geocentric model
we have the earth and we have Mars and
earth is at the center of the universe
why not
Right? It's arbitrary, right? It's been
re with translation. It's all the same.
And uh the other planets orbit the earth
on orbits.
All right? This is the weird thing about
these geocentric models. And this is
required to get them to be accurate. In
fact, you need more than two circles.
You need a bunch of little circles to
make them accurate. But it works. It
totally works from a what you know about
the physical structure of the solar
system. This is bonkers. but it's a
really good model for predicting the
path of planets in the sky. And what
happens, I'll animate this for you, um,
is when this goes around, we trace it
out. You imagine yourself a as a viewer
on the blue sphere, you will see it go
backwards, right? at a particular point
in the sky. Um, this strategy of putting
circles on circles and having them
rotate one another is a fantastic way to
construct arbitrarily good
approximations to almost any continuous
path, right? It's it's a really magical
thing. You can use it for lots of things
other than just wrong models of the
solar system, but that's what it's most
famous for. Um, this is linear
regression.
This is what I want to get across to
you. You have to keep in mind that it is
a thing for approximating some data set
and producing predictions which can be
arbitrarily good but there's nothing
that guarantees that the structure of
the model is is scientifically correct.
Yeah, you have to keep that in mind as
we go through what's the actual
explanation just for entertainment. The
actual explanation again a cartoon
version is is very cool as well. Um, now
here we have something a little bit more
accurate, although this is not a super
accurate model of the solar system,
right? But we have the Earth on an orbit
and a Mars on a wider orbit. And I'm
drawing this line, this white line,
which is the perspective of a viewer on
Earth looking at Mars. And so there's
this um other very wide circle that I've
drawn on this slide. And this will be
sort of the background, the star
background that you think Mars is cast
against. is like the curtain of the
heavens, right? When you look up in the
sky. And so you're seeing, as it were,
Mars as if it's projected on that
because when you look at it as a viewer
on Earth, you don't know how far away it
is. It looks like it's projected on the
curtain of the stars. Yeah. Do I sound
like a madman or does this make sense to
you? Yes. Okay. Yes. Um, so now what's
going to happen when we animate this is
that it will zigzag because the Earth
catches up, right? And this is why
there's retrograde motion. Isn't that
cool? Yes. So the same thing happens
with all the planets for the same reason
or from any planet from Earth. If you
were on Mars looking at Earth, it Earth
would have retrograde motion. In fact,
we know this because the Mars observer
robots see retrograde motion of the
Earth on Mars, right? So test the model
really well by putting robots on the
other planets. Uh it's a neat thing.
Okay, we're not going to do this model.
uh but I made this in R with with simple
trigonometry so it's not it's not such a
hard model to do right um okay where
does linear regression come into this uh
how do you do estimation how do you fit
curves to astronomical data it's easy
enough to say these days oh well you
just you know draw the equations and see
which one fits but remember telescopes
used to suck now the the quality of
telescope you could buy today in Leipig
is much much better than anything that
the people who figured this stuff out
had, right? Just the our ability to
grind lenses now is vastly better than
it used to be. Kingdoms used to defend
their crafts people that knew how to
make glass. Like it was just like a
crazy time. Yeah. Now this is just an
open secret. Um
so uh you want to think back to the uh
1700s. Um, lots of astronomy has
happened by this point. Uh, all of
European scientific establishment agrees
that the sun is at the center of the
solar system and you don't have orbits
on orbits, right? All of that revolution
has already happened. But there's still
a lot of uncertainty in trying to figure
out distances and new objects are being
discovered all the time and people don't
know if they're new planets, but if you
can find a new planet, you can get it
named after you and be famous. And so
everybody wants to do that, right? It's
always like this. Um, so there was this
rock which I I show here on this slide.
This is an asteroid that we now call
series which has this really weird
orbit. It orbits between Mars and
Jupiter. There are a bunch of asteroids
we now know. But this is a really big
one. It's it's huge. It's like planet
sized. It's bigger than Pluto. Yeah,
it's a big piece of rock. It's big
enough that it makes a sphere, right?
Its own gravity makes it into a sphere.
And this had been seen uh through
terrible telescopes um a few times. And
there was a competition to figure out to
predict when it would be seen again.
People called it a comet at the time. It
was just a white spot in a in a
telescope. And so, uh, enter into our
story, um, the most egotistical and
intelligent person on the earth at the
time, Fried Scouse. And Germans here
will know him because you start hearing
about him early in school, right? But
no, genuinely one of the smartest people
to have ever lived. Yeah. And uh in his
20s he had already founded the field of
number theory and he was bored and poor.
No one really wanted to buy his number
theory book I guess. And so he decided
to enter this competition to make some
money and a name for himself. So he
dabbled in astronomy which he really in
his diary said he hated. He hated
astronomy. It's so impure. There's data
involved, right? Um and uh so he begins
to take the measurements and essentially
invent a whole scaffold of basian uh
regression in order to fit models of
orbits to the really bad astronomical
observations of of what we now know as
series. This is an amazing
accomplishment.
And he wrote this whole book that came
out in 1809 in which he has a basian
derivation for uh le squares estimation
what we now call le squares estimation
which you associate with frequentist
regression. But all of his justification
is basian because that was the only
probability theory at the time. Right?
This was before the frequentist
revolution that happened in England
uh in the late 1800s early 1900s. Uh
sorry this is some of this history is is
irrelevant but I think embedding these
things in history can help you see how
all these arguments fluctuate around
empirical topics right and people invent
methods so they can solve particular
problems and then we generalize the
methods and apply them to new ones um
the basian stuff is old really old in
this regard uh and this will help in in
this lecture too because I want to draw
a distinction between the statistical
model itself its structure and the
scientific concepts we built into it and
then the machinery we use to approximate
the posterior distribution. Gaus used
ordinary le squares which you think of
as not a basian procedure probably but
it's a perfectly good procedure for
getting an approximation of a of a
posterior distribution when you don't
have a fancy computer. It's fast. You
can do it with a slide rule. Yeah. A
table. Um so what is linear regression?
uh I want to get across the idea here
that linear regression is an extremely
useful family of statistical estimators.
They can be conceived of as basian or
non-basian. Uh you can use them with
different kinds of approximations or no
approximation at all and they can be
extended in many directions as we do
model expansion into new projects. I'm
going to give you the simplest possible
example I can today. Um and I want you
to think all along about this
relationship between the statistical
model itself and the generative model
that allows us to interpret it.
Um these models I'm going to call them
geocentric to remind you of this basic
idea that they they simply the
statistical model does nothing more than
describe associations among the
variables and we can use those
associations to make predictions but the
model itself is not mechanistic in any
way not scientifically mechanistic any
way it's just an additive model about
the assoc that establishes associations
between variables and that's fine. Yeah.
uh but the scientific models of the
system like the solar system might be
much more complicated than the model we
use to fit the data to some predictive
model. uh the other thing that comes in
in linear regression is this
distribution we now call Gaussian. So in
that 1809 book Gaus also has an argument
in which he deres the distribution we
now call Gaussian. Uh, so they used in
the old German money, right? I think it
was the tin note, right? Wasn't it the
tin? Uh, had had Gaus's picture on it
and the and the equation for the
Gaussian distribution. You could use it
to cheat on tests, right? Keep one in
your pocket. I think I have one at home,
right? Everybody keeps one of these with
Papa Gaus on it. Um,
uh, he didn't call it the Gaussian
distribution, although he was arrogant
enough to have done such a thing, but he
didn't actually do it. uh his argument
is incredibly simple. Uh his argument uh
departs purely from the idea that the
error in observation with a bad
telescope is symmetric in all directions
and from that he builds up that the uh
most plausible distribution of errors
will have that bell curve and he deres
it entirely from that. Now, there are
lots of uh similar derivations of the
Gaussian distribution, and I'm going to
talk about why they're so common in
nature. Um, and it's because there's a
simple generative set of processes that
produce them. Uh, but see that that goes
all the way back to Gaus is he's using
it as a an approximation to not worry
about the exact generative structure of
the mistakes, right? Because that's
hard. You'd have to understand the the
machinery of the telescope and the
observer's hands and how their eyes work
and all of that stuff to actually have a
physical model of the air distribution.
He's like, "No, no, no, minimal. The
airs are symmetric in every direction.
What happens? You get a bell curve,
right?" And it's true. You do. That's a
very nice achievement. Um, okay. Let me
let me uh give you another way to get a
Gaussian distribution. um uh that that
reveals sort of the basic mechanistic or
generative class of processes that
produce Gaussian distributions and it
does it relates to um uh it relates to
additivity not to symmetry. Symmetry
will give it to you but you don't have
to have symmetry. So I want to talk
about said it's about additivity. So, I
want you to imagine that we all go out
to a football pitch or some other field
and we stand on the center line and each
of you has a coin um or a four-sided die
or something like that and you flip the
coin or roll the four-sided die and if
the coin is heads, you take one step to
the left and if it's tails, you take one
step to the right or the four-sided die.
If it's a one or a two, you go left. If
it's a three or four, you go right.
Something like that. And if we all
simulate this, your your position on the
field will be the sum of your movements,
right? So, some of you will get a bunch
of tails in a row and you go really far
to the left or wherever I said tails
went. And others will get a bunch of
heads and you'll go really far to the
other direction. Uh others you'll get
some mix and they'll tend to cancel one
another and you'll end up somewhere in
the middle. So, what happens in the
aggregate with a large number of
students? Um well, you get this kind of
pattern. You probably sense where this
is going. This is not much of a mystery
what's going to happen here. We're going
to get a normal distribution from this
approximately normal distribution. So
these are all of the very many students
jiggling around and they don't
eventually someone will just wander off
the map, right? But most people stay
there's a center of gravity uh and and
you get an approximately constant uh
variance.
Um so we can uh compare this to the
distribution which would mean we uh
create bins for distances from the
center line and we count up the number
of people in those and we make a
histogram and that's the distribution
and that would look like this. The same
animation with the distribution on the
white on the right with red just
indicating to the left of the center
line and blue to the right and this is
approximately Gaussian. Yeah. So all you
need is additivity. If you add
fluctuations together under some general
conditions, meaning you don't have
infinite variance, then you get a
Gaussian distribution. And so nature is
full of these things. Height is is
approximately Gaussian distributed I say
approximately the tails are kind of
thick in human height, right? Because of
epistasis. But um you get approximately
Gaussian distributions whenever you add
small fluctuations together, which is
cool. Uh which is also why when you see
something is distributed normally, it
means nothing about how it's generated,
right? It doesn't give you any important
scientific insight into the biology or
the physics that generate it. It's just
that there are small fluctuations
involved. But that's also good because
that means we can use normal
distributions to model error and
frequency distributions in a wide range
of contexts without understanding the
detailed processes that produce that
variance. As long as that's not our our
scientific interest and that's what Gaus
was able to do. Uh I didn't tell you
what happened with Gaus's modeling of
series. He did predict when it was would
be back and he uh did win the
competition and he did become famous.
Yes. And a bunch of cool astronomical
statistics went from there. Um okay. So
that summarize my little sermon about
the Gaussian distribution. There are two
arguments for using normal distributions
in statistics or in scientific modeling
more generally. Uh and they're both
valid and and they apply at the same
time. The first is the generative
argument that I just showed you on the
the movie on the previous slide. uh as
long as we've got some some process that
produces small fluctuations and those
fluctuations add or damp one another
then you tend to get a distribution
which is shaped like a belt curve. Uh
the derivation of that is a little bit
more mysterious but it can be proven
mathematically and still not understood.
So I'm not going to bother showing you
the proof but you can look it up on
Wikipedia if you're interested. Um
there's a bunch of different proofs
motivated different ways. My experience
is that it doesn't add any
understanding. It's just this thing that
happens. Um
and the other is the inferial
perspective.
Uh what the Gaussian distribution is is
a distribution that contains only
information about mean and dispersion.
That's all it is because that's the
those are the two parameters of a
Gaussian distribution. Just the mean and
the dispersion. So a Gaussian
distribution in a statistical estimator
is just a machine for estimating the
mean and dispersion. And it does that
perfectly fine. Even if the data are not
normally distributed, you can have
uniformly distributed data. If you want
the mean and dispersion of them, you can
use linear regression. It will give you
the right answer. Yeah, nothing breaks.
It's just a machine for estimating mean
and dispersion. So relax. Yeah, it's
perfectly useful in a wide range of
contexts. It does not in fact depend
upon the frequency distribution of the
variable being normal.
Okay. Um,
right. Oh, yeah, that was supposed to be
animating. Sorry. All right, we we'll
skip that. You've already seen it. All
right. So, um, in terms of skill
development goals in this particular
lecture, thinking about your skilling
up, uh, I want to teach you a language
for representing statistical models. I
know you've seen these things before.
The book is full of them, but I want to
spend a little bit of time on this first
one, being very pedantic with it, if
that's okay. Uh uh second I want to
spend some time talking about
calculating posterior distributions when
we have more than one unknown. In the
previous two lectures for the globe
tossing example there was only one thing
we were trying to estimate. It was the
proportion of water on the globe. Now
we're going to have multiple things and
we need to estimate them all
simultaneously. Uh the logic is the same
but it seems weirder. So I want to spend
more time just in this lecture talking
through the logic of that. In future
lectures, I'm just going to wave my
hands and skip past it. We're going to
have so many unknowns as we move through
this hundreds soon. Just hundreds of
them. The logic is exactly the same.
Basian updating works exactly the same
way uh with a hundred unknowns or
thousand or a million as it does with
one, which is very nice. Now, it's
slower with more unknowns, but uh it
works the same way. Um and then third
obviously I want to give you uh some
instruction on how to uh construct and
understand linear models or or linear
regressions. Um in material like this
there's this uh it's a bit overwhelming
because everything comes at you at once.
I think that's just how statistics is.
You've got to learn probability theory
and there's all of this formalization
and there's code and there's the general
scientific anxiety of what are we doing?
Yeah. And all of this you can't take it
one at a time. It just all comes
together at once in this project. And
so, uh, what I encourage you to do in
learning this stuff is not really
attempt to understand it all at once.
I'm going to say that again. This seems
like bad teacher advice, but I really
mean it. Don't insist. Don't feel like
you have to understand it all at once.
You don't. You just need to understand
enough to keep swimming,
right? So that you're not standing
still. And this is what I call flow,
right? So, uh, when you're in the flow
state, you're a little bit confused. You
feel resistance, but you can keep
moving, right? That means you're not
bored. Yeah. Because you feel some
resistance. If it's too easy, it's it's
then you're bored. uh uh it's it's then
I've pitched it wrong. If I pitch it
right, you feel some resistance. Um but
you're not stopped. Right? So that's
where I want you to be is don't feel
like you're stopped. The reality about
about applied mathematical methods or
statistical methods as a specific
example is that it really takes a long
time to fully understand every component
together, but you can do good work
before you understand it all. This
sounds like heresy coming from a stats
instructor, but it's just true. Yeah,
it's just how it is for lots of
scientific skills. And so, be patient
with yourself. Enjoy the flow. Um, Enya
is the proper proper accompaniment to
this slide, by the way. If if you know
Enya. Yes. Okay. Um,
come on fish. Yes. All right. Um, let's
get into our workflow as soon as the
fish are done. All right.
Uh, so remember the the core basian
workflow. So I'm going to fill this out
this slide out today with our first
linear regression example. Um, moving
from well the first thing we're going to
do is meet the data set, but then we'll
define our estim. We'll build up a
generative model. We'll build build a
linear regression as statistical model
in the middle. We'll do an explicit
prior predictive simulation with it to
help us understand the model more. Prior
predictive uh simulations is something
we'll do a lot in the specific examples
because they help you understand what
priors are and I understand that that's
an important thing. Yeah. Um then we'll
update the posterior to get an estimate
and then we'll produce posterior
predictions out of it. Right. Posterior
predictions to remind you are important
both for knowing what the model thinks
uh like the causal effects and so on or
posterior predictions but also for
checking the model and making sure that
it fit the data at all because sometimes
we mess up and uh and it doesn't and you
can see that when you push out posterior
predictions. Okay. Uh the data set we're
going to use is from Nancy Howell's uh
life histories of the Dobbe Kung. Um
this is a great book has lots of
anthropometric data. I think most of
these data were collected in the 1960s
in the Kalahari. And we're just going to
look at um height by weight which I know
may seem like a boring statistical
problem but I promise you it isn't.
Yeah. Or at least maybe boring's good.
Yeah. In this case. Um, so that this
data set are built into my rethinking
package just data how one. There's a how
two that has other variables if you have
lots of free time and you want to play
around. Okay. Uh, we're going to make it
easier today. I'm just going to model
adults because the overall pattern
including sub adults is complicated. But
later on in the book uh we come back to
that and modeled it all at once with a
very simple alometric model. uh but just
the adults subsetting the adults which
means everybody greater than or equal to
18. Every time I do this, just as an
aside, I think like what is 18 to
somebody living in the Kalahari in 1960,
like it's a very weird there's no like
legal status, nothing magical that
happened when you turned 18. Why am I
using 18 as a definition of adulthood
for these people? It's But let's I guess
let's move past that. That's my problem
to share with my therapist, right? Um
anyway once you got this you can see uh
uh this is this is kind of linear not
perfectly but there's a lot of scatter
and building a model up in this will
take us the rest of the lecture. Okay.
So what are we going to try to do? We're
going to try to influ uh estimate the
influence of height on weight not of
weight on height because that's crazy.
Right? So this is the first thing I know
it seems but this is causal thinking.
Right? You think about which of these
could you intervene on and change the
other? We can intervene on on height and
change your weight. We can intervene on
your weight without changing your
height.
And now you're thinking of counter
examples and I encourage that. I can
think of several too. But right like you
could chop off someone's legs, right?
That will change their weight and
height. Yeah. But yeah, Mon, some of you
are making this face like, "Oh my god,
did you just say that?" Yeah, sorry. But
you know, you can think of things like
that. But under a range of non-monstrous
interventions, uh, intervening on height
will always change weight, but
intervening on weight does usually not
does not change height. Yeah. Um so
that's our goal and we have this data
set. Uh now we need a generative model.
Um let's start as usual in this course
when I when we start building a
generative model we make we just map out
the structure the causal structure
between the variables or sometimes I'll
say which variables listen to which
other variables. So again use the
interventionist logic if it helps you if
we which variables if we intervene on
them cause changes in which other
variables. So in this one we're
asserting if we intervene on height it
changes weight. So weight is some
function of height uh in a statistical
sense.
Um to make this generative we have to
specify other things like a distribution
right and a measurement process and and
things like that. Um there are a bunch
modeling human height uh especially
growth and development is a whole big
field on its own. some people in my
department who who are doing a
cross-cultural study of child growth and
so uh I happen to know that there's a
lot of options and it's a still a
dynamic field and there are a bunch of
dynamic models biologically inspired
dynamic models which we're not going to
address here because we're we're driving
towards linear regression but just to
tell you that there are a bunch of
biological models that really model
microprocesses of human growth starting
from birth and that's what makes it
complicated we're going to do adults uh
which is mainly when growth has stopped
or let's just say adulthood is when you
shrink.
Yeah, some of us know about this, right?
But it'll happen to all of you. Um, but
there's there's lots of important things
there. Uh, and also I think this is an
anthropology institute for the
anthropologists here. There's lots of
cool things about about human growth and
development in adolescence that are
still not well understood like the
growth spurts and why they happen when
they do, why boys grow later than girls.
Things like that really don't have have
solid evolutionary explanations. So
there's there's good stuff to do here.
It's not a dead field. Um static models
just model the associations. They just
do curve fitting. And that's what we're
going to do today. There's nothing wrong
with the static models. You can use them
to do lots of important stuff like tell
if a child is under height for their
age. Yeah, there perfectly good
application for these sorts of
statistical models. But there's no
growth mechanisms in these in these
sorts of linear models. So let's let's
take an example of such a thing. We
build up uh from a structural diagram.
How does height influence weight? It'll
be true in all of these structural
diagrams in the course that I'm there's
going to be um unmeasured influences on
the variable of interest. So in in this
diagram on this slide, this is the
letter U that has the circle around it.
The circle is a convention in these
structural diagrams for for unobserved
that is we haven't measured it. There's
a bunch of other stuff that influences
your weight. It's not perfectly
determined by your height. Yeah, that's
all it means. Um, and so in almost all
of these structural diagrams, there's an
implied unmeasured U pointing into every
variable. And usually I'll just leave it
out. But in this one case, I think it's
important to have it here so that you
understand I'm not insane. And I don't
think that I determines weight perfectly
because that's uh because that's not
what the cyclical model is going to say
either.
>> Um, there will be a distribution that
represents the U. That's what we're
going to do here. Yeah, you could add
the U and you could give the U the
distribution and then it it works out
the same way. But um so actually I think
in a couple slides it I have that
construction. Um so uh we could think of
that about this one generative version
of this structural model but certainly
not the only is this simple additive
model where we say weight is equal to
some proportion of height where that
proportion is beta. the letter beta.
Now, what that value that proportion
takes depends upon your measurement
units, right? So, I don't want to get
into all that. And of course,
measurement scales are an invention of
the human species. God does not had no
kilograms, right? What's what's the
speed of light in heaven? One, right?
It's the speed of light. It's one speed
of light, right? This is a joke, but no,
all measurement scales are inventions of
people and they're cultural things.
They're arbitrary. The universe doesn't
have measurement scales, right? There's
only the plon length. There's nothing
else, right? That's all there is. So,
um, uh, so beta will be a different
value depending upon which arbitrary set
of measurement scales you pick. There's
nothing wrong with that. It's it's but
you just want to understand there's a
proportionality, right? Does that make
sense? Um, and then U is our other stuff
which is additive. What makes this an
additive model is that there's an
addition sign there, right? This is not
the only option. It could be
multiplicative. There's lots of
different sorts of models you could use.
Um, and I want to give you an example of
a function that simulates from this
model to show you that it's really
generative. Um, and what I'm imposing
now is the assumption that the
unobserved U stuff like in Gaus's
astronomy example is normally
distributed. There's a bunch of little
influences and they're additive and
additive fluctuations on a person's
weight. And so, uh, if we sum them all
up, the the noise will tend to be
normally distributed. That's the
assertion that's being made here. Or you
could think of it as the inferial
justification.
We want to estimate the mean and
variance. The Gaussian distribution is a
machine for doing that. But, but this is
a generative model. So, uh, uh, you'd
have to say here it's just like we're
not interested in the scatter. we're
going to give it a constant variance and
then Gaussian is the inferial choice. So
this is just a simple function for
sampling. Um r norm is just random
normal. Uh we have means we we generate
the u's with a mean of zero and some
specified standard deviation and then we
add those to the heights times the
proportionality uh b that we choose and
then we return the weights. That's the
generative model. Does this help to see
how it's generative? So you can simulate
data out of this. If I have enough time
today, I'll show you how to use this to
validate that your statistical model
works, right? Because we can make fake
data with this function. Yeah. And
that's not to cheat. It's to have some
faith that your statistical model works.
Um so uh we can actually run it uh
without the um we can generate here uh
some heights. uh what you have to input
into sim weight is a set of heights. So
like we simulate people 200 people here
with heights that are are uniformly
distributed between 138 and 170
something centimeters and
then pass that into the the simulation
for weight and plot them and you get
fake people.
Okay. Very exciting. I know. But this is
to understand the generative why this is
a generative model is because you can
make data with it. That's a question.
>> Yeah. So you're not using the real data
you just now showing you can
>> this. Yeah. There's no real data here.
This is all fake data. Yeah. This is
that say there's a generative model. Can
it produce data that looks anything like
the real data? Yes, it can. That that
doesn't mean it's the right generative
model. It's almost certainly not. in
fact, but it makes data that looks
similar question.
>> But why did you use the uniform
distribution for height?
>> U that's a good why did I use the
uniform distribution for height? Just
for the simplicity of of having the
whole x-axis represented on this plot.
Uh it's whatever target synthetic
population you could use any
distribution of height from whatever
target population you want.
earlier said that normally we can find
>> Yes, exactly.
>> So you could you could simulate a bunch
of normally distributed heights and pass
it in as well. Yeah.
Yeah. Um okay let's talk a little bit
about describing models and this is a
language that works both for a large
class of generative models and
statistical models partly because
remember basian models are both
generative and statistical. you can run
them in both directions. And so for a
lot of the examples uh including this
one, the same notation can be used for
the generative model can be run forward
to produce um data that is you put in
parameter values and it and it gives you
variables. Uh but it can also be run the
other way that we call that statistical
estimation. You put in variables and you
get out parameter values or
distributions of parameter values. Now,
it's the same thing, but there's a
notation for these models that looks the
same in both cases or almost the same.
Um, and the you want to think about this
convention. This is a convention that's
not purely basian, by the way. It's just
the basian. There's priors in the basian
version. There's not priors in the
non-basian version. Uh, we list all the
variables and then for each we define
each variable as either a deterministic
or distributional function of the other
variables. And that means nothing to a a
psychologically healthy person. So let
me show you an example what I mean. So
for this generative model of height, we
could reexpress it as w subi is equal to
beta hi plus ui. And then these
distributional definitions um for for u
subi and h subi. Let me take each of
these
pieces uh on its own help you understand
what I mean. So as I define this
notation, we list all the variables. The
variables are on the left. Yeah, those
are the variables. And there's some
other variables the the keeney among you
will see that I have not defined yet,
but we'll get to that. Um and then we
define each of them either as a
deterministic
uh or a distributional function of the
others. Um these little sub eyes here
index individuals. So the idea is in
your data set each row is 1 2 3 4 5 six
seven and those are the values of I. So
I is a symbol that represents that this
applies to every individual every row in
the same way in hierarchical models
which we get to at the very last lecture
of this section. Um you can have
multiple subscripts because you've got
individuals embedded in families or
households for example and then you have
I's and J's. You could have a time
series where you've got I at time t.
Yeah, those are all different
subscripts. Uh and and it can get
confusing, but uh you get uh you get
better at it with some experience. Uh
the equals means a deterministic
relationship as you'd expect. And that
little squiggle uh means you can read as
distributed as.
Okay, it doesn't determine the thing
because the distributional definitions
on the right don't produce unique
values. they produce distributions.
Yeah. Um so the top line is the equation
for expected weight. I had given to that
to you before. This is the additive
model uh from the structural model. And
then we have a distributional definition
for the errors for the u subi. This is
Gaussian error with a standard deviation
sigma. So we're going to have to define
sigma. Um and then uh height I have
defined as a uniform distribution. Uh
this part isn't essential, right? But
it's for a full generative model, you
have to generate all the variables.
Yeah, but we're not committed to height
being uniformly distributed in the
population. That's not what this
requires because it's not.
Um, okay.
Uh, last thing to say about this before
we get back to modeling. The way this
math stats notation works again is you
kind of read it bottom to top, right? So
the things on the bottom have the have
fewer dependencies and the things at the
top depend upon them. So that
deterministic equation at the top needs
the definitions of all the other
variables. Do you see? But in your code
it works the other way. You can't
generate the weights until you've
defined all the other variables. And so
the code runs the other direction. Again
I I apologize last time for this. I
don't know why I'm apologizing. This is
just the way the universe is. Yeah. I
don't it's just somebody decided to do
it this way at some point and that's
just how it goes. Um there are computer
languages that don't that are that just
do definitions, right? And so then
they're you can write them like stats
models, but R is not one of them. Yeah.
Nor is Python, right? They're procedural
and they execute top to bottom. Uh but
but that's not always the case. Um, Stan
is partly uh procedural and partly
declarative and I don't think we'll have
to worry about that because my package
takes it away from your attention,
right? Which is the goal. Okay, back to
the workflow. Um, so we've made some
progress. I hope you feel like you made
some progress. Yeah. Uh, we we had our
estimative model which I am just going
to represent. I mean, I could put that
whole mass notation there, but it'll
make the slide even uglier. So I've
resisted that and I'm just going to put
this little structural diagram where W
is a function of H and U. Is that okay?
But you remember it's an additive
generative model. Now we need to
generate a statistical model. And the
statistical model what I mean here is a
couple of things. And uh
first there's the structure of the
estimator. That's how it's going to
relate uh measurements to one another.
and then how we approximate the
posterior distribution using it. So
you've got choices to make there. So in
the previous lectures um the way we got
the posterior distribution there were
two ways we did it. Uh we did an
approximation
approximating the globe as as a a die
with a fixed number of sides. That's
called a grid approximation. That works
fine but it's really slow as as you get
more and more variables. And then we had
an analytical solution for the globe
tossing model. this thing called the
beta distribution. Remember that. Um, so
the analytical solution could also work
in this case. We're still in the realm
of things integrals that can be solved,
but in general in in basian statistics,
you can't close the integral. So I'm not
going to bother with that today. And
grid approximation would work fine. In
fact, in the book chapter, I show you
the grid approximation for this problem,
but I'm not going to emphasize that in
lecture because as you get more
variables in the posterior distribution,
grid approximation is just not
practical. it's way too slow. Um, and so
we're going to use another kind of
approximation and and I'll I'll explain
it to you when we get there. And then
later we're going to use marov chain
Monte Carlo which is yet another
approximation to the posterior
distribution. Um, but that's a separate
choice from defining the estimator is
what I want to get across. The same is
true in non-basian stats. You've got the
estimator its structure and then you
need some machine practical way to get
the sampling distribution from it. Yeah.
So it's the choices. This is not an
extra thing. It's just in bays you're
always approximating the same thing
which is the posterior distribution. In
non-bays you're approximating lots of
things. There's lots of different
choices ways to construct uh estimates.
Um and a lot of them work.
Okay.
Uh what do we mean by the estimator
here? This is going to look a lot like
the statistical model by intent. As I
said before, um, one of the reasons I
like working in the basian framework is
it means I don't have to be clever. If I
can define a generative model, many of
the pieces of the statistical estimator
are defined for me because the basian
model is generative. So I can use the
structure of the generative model to
write a statistical estimator. So we
we're going to follow that strategy
here. Um, we're going to be model trying
to estimate the average uh weight
conditional on each height. That is for
each height there will be some
distribution that we're going to we're
going to get and we're going to be
focusing on the expectation.
So what the machine is going to give us
as a posterior distribution will let you
uh have fun. For example, at at the
world's most boring party people might
shout might shout out heights and you
would have to guess the uh most likely
weight. Uh this regression would would
make you win. Yeah. Because you could
you would know the expected value for
every different height. Yes. don't go to
that party. But if you were at that
party, you would be set. Yeah. So the
the structure of a linear regression is
always uh uh just this. There might be
more terms in a complex um multiple
regression, but you're always getting
the expectation. That's what that E
means or the average
um of the outcome variable here, weight
uh conditional on height. So you can
plug in a height and the equation gives
you the uh expectation of the weight and
this comes from some intercept parameter
alpha uh and then
uh some proportionality uh with height.
Usually you call the proportionality
variable a slope
for historical reasons. Yeah, does this
make sense? This is probably familiar to
most of you. Um what may not be familiar
is how this relates to estimation then.
So remember in bay we're getting
distributions. The estimate is a
distribution. Uh so you can put this
back into the logic of the previous two
lectures. This is the the terrifying
definition of the posterior distribution
in this model. We've got three unknowns
to get distributions for the posterior
distribution for. So for every um
combination of alpha, beta and sigma,
sigma is the error distribution around
the u remember it's the measurement
error so to speak the distribution
around the expectation. Um alpha could
be any real number, beta could be any
real number and sigma could be any
positive real number.
For all of those combinations, how many
are there? Infinity.
We would like a relative ranking of the
plausibility of that combination. I'll
say that again. For every possible
combination of alpha, beta, and sigma.
And how many are there? An infinite
number of them. We would like uh a
number between zero and one, which is
the relative plausibility of that
combination against all the others. Um
easy. It turns out it is. I know it
sounds like madness, but sometimes
infinities are easy. And and this is one
of those cases. The structure of this um
is is really just like the globe tossing
thing. So I want to spend a little bit
of time here. We're not going to do math
with this, but I want you to understand
the structure and logic. In future
examples, I won't bother with this
definition because they all have this
same structure. Again, that's nice about
being basian is you don't have to be
clever. Every problem has the same
internal structure. Um so the left here
is the posterior probability of any
specific line because any specific
combination of alpha and beta defines a
line.
Yeah. And then sigma is the scatter
around that line. And I'll give you a
visualization of that as we go. Um this
thing on the right. So this is just B
theorem. I in the book I I I spend a
little bit more time defining it. Um uh
this expression here, the probability of
any particular weight conditional on a
height and the values of the parameters.
This is the count of the ways through
the garden of forking data. Uh the fact
that there's an infinite number of ways
through the garden. Don't let that
frighten you. It's just a big garden and
computers are good at counting these
things. Rather, calculus is this is what
the normal distribution does. This is
where the equation for the normal
distribution arrived. That simulation of
us on the football pitch that count
that's the number of students who will
be in each category, right? So counting
the number of ways to realize weights at
different distances from some expected
value, right? Where the expected value
is defined by alpha and beta. Does this
make some sense? Yeah. Um, and then this
thing here, the probability of alpha,
beta, and sigma, the particular values
of alpha, beta, and sigma are the prior.
They're the prior before you update on
the sample. What are the relative
plausibilities? And we'll talk more
about the prior a little bit later. Um,
and then this thing on the bottom, uh,
zed or z is the normalizing constant.
It's a big expression which is the sum
of all of the tops for every combination
of alphas, beta, and sigma. It's a big
integral. It's an integral over alpha,
beta, and sigma, all of their values.
So, it's a triple integral. Those of you
who've had integral calculus, you're
really excited now. Yeah. Um, but it's a
Gaussian integral. If you choose
everything just right, and it can be
closed, but we're not going to do it in
this case. The the normalizing constant
is almost never of any interest. It's
just a thing there that we ignore. It's
just to make the counts into
probabilities. That's the reason it
exists. It normalizes. Okay? So it's
it's just there and it's it's hard to
compute. Um
right so th this is what the stat model
looks like in notation form remember and
if you want to have some uh human way to
explain this to your family when they
call you and ask you what you're doing
in stats class you can say well I
studying how w is distributed normally
with mean that is linear function of h.
Yeah that helps at all.
Um, now how are we? We we've got an
estimator, but we now we have to
approximate the posterior distribution.
We're not going to do it analytically
and I'm not going to do the grid
approximation. Although again, in the
book I show you the grid approximation.
For conceptual understanding, you might
want to take a look at that. Um, I think
it's chapter 4. Yeah, it's very long
chapter uh introduces linear regression.
Um, for many of the examples in the next
lecture, including this one, we're going
to use something called the quadratic
approximation. Uh, it's sometimes called
the lelass approximation after this guy
who's on the stamp, right? Uh, lelass is
um the actual father of basian
statistics, not bays. Bae wrote a paper,
never published it, died, right? Lelass
instead spent a big chunk of his his
most uh preeminent years as a
mathematician working on basian
probability and estimation. So should
have been named after lelass. This is
the French math, right? It's the one way
to think about it unless you don't like
French and in which case I never said
that. But um no, the leelas
approximation it's often called that
because he used this quite a lot. And
why can we do this? What we're going to
do is we're going to assume the
posterior distribution is a multivariate
Gaussian distribution. That is the
marginal distribution of every parameter
in it is Gaussian. And then if we know
the covariances between the variables,
we know everything about them. Um it
turns out that most of the time that's
approximately true. Why? Because if you
add little fluctuations together, you
get Gaussian distributions. And this
also turns out to be true in statistics.
There's this thing called the central
limit theorem that makes lots of things
Gaussian. And so the posterior
distribution often, not always, often is
approximately Gaussian in many if not
all of the variables inside of it. There
will be examples later where that's
definitely not true. Um like with
multivariate models, I mean multi-level
models, the this kind of approximation
is not very effective. But for multiple
regression, it's an unreasonably
effective for how dumb it sounds. Yeah.
Works extremely well. And it also
computes really fast. Um so uh uh yeah
if you want to understand
mechanistically what's going on more you
can look on page 41 in the book. Um
uh I should say that the quadratic
approximation is also what maximum
likelihood estimation does in almost all
cases. So if you're doing non-basian
statistics with maximum likelihood
you're doing a quadratic approximation
almost certainly not always. You might
be doing likelihood profiles but
probably your software is just doing a
quadratic approximation. Yeah. And it
works. uh uh uh because it's basian,
right? No, they wouldn't say that, but
it's the same calculation. Um if you
want to run it, uh so again, on page 41
of the book, I show you how you could do
it by hand with just like raw lines of
our code, but you'd be crazy to do that
in your normal life. Yeah. Do it once
for the sake of learning and then forget
and move on. Yeah. So, um my package uh
has a a function called quap. Yeah. for
quadratic approximation.
Um if you're using Python, whatever
library you're using will have some uh
some maximum likelihood routine which
will do the same thing. Um and you just
define the stat model uh with this
syntax that's very similar by design to
the statistical model notation and then
it uh by the time your screen updates it
will have given you a posterior
approximation. It's it's so fast. Um I
want you to see that I've added some
lines to this which are the priors. Uh
uh we can talk about these priors and
simulate from them in a bit. Um so we
can understand them better. And in fact
this first time I really want to show
you uh a prior predictive simulation.
Uh so we can understand what the prior
means. uh because I don't know uh maybe
you're better than me at this but when I
just when you tell me a list of priors
it's very hard to know what they imply
about the outcome space. uh so you don't
have to guess you can simulate from the
priors right basian models are
generative they will produce data even
if you have no data yeah in a sample
size of zero you can simulate
observations from the model and that's a
good thing to do to understand what the
model thinks right so we're going to do
that and that's probably the last thing
we'll do today and then we'll pick up
next week uh with estimating so we we
talk about what's called the prior
predictive distribution the end of the
previous lecture we had the poster
interior predictive distribution that is
after you've updated on the data you can
push predictions out of the model with
the full uncertainty in the posterior
distribution to know what the model
thinks. Um, we can do that with the
prior, right? Because remember, every
posterior is a prior,
right? So, it's it's the same animal.
Um, and
my general philosophy about prior, and
this is my philosophy, and I'll argue
for it in all of the examples, is that
prior should express scientific
knowledge, but not all of it. Uh, just
softly, or these are sometimes called
weekly informative priors. And why not
all of it? Because you want to discover
model misspecification. If you rigidly
put scientific constraints in the stat
model, it it makes it more difficult to
discover really bonkers things about the
model. And I'll give you some examples
as we go through. Uh so we use these
things that I call weekly informative
prior, not fully informative prior. Um
uh the point of the the the only purpose
of these priors is to make uh really
impossible outcomes implausible in the
model. I'll show you what that means.
So,
in a model like this, uh, what's the
first thing you know? Well, when height
equals zero, weight equals zero,
right? An infinitely small baby weighs
nothing. Okay, but that's that's an
anchor point. And often you want to look
for anchor points in measurements like
this. I know it seems silly, but it's
true. Yeah. When you were one cell, you
weighed one cell, right? Which we'll
call almost zero. Yeah. Um
and then weight increases with height.
Uh weight kilogram is less than height
in centimeters uh for most people. So
that's where the measurement scale comes
in. And that gives you an expectation
about beta,
right? That it's going to be less than
one. So this is how you want to think
about symbols. I know it seems silly,
but this is how you make sense of the
structure of the model. It's just simple
understandings about like that. And then
sigma must be positive. So I've defined
some priors here. uh the intercept alpha
um just a normal distribution centered
on zero. Uh alpha is the value is the
expected value of weight when height is
zero. Right? So we're going to center it
on zero. That's why that prior is there.
Um and I've made it really wide just to
again discover model misspecification.
Maybe it doesn't end up being around
zero. Um and that'll help me think about
the model more. And then beta uh I've
defined as uniform between zero and one.
I don't think this is the best choice,
but it's I use it in this example to
help you think through it. I typically
use Gaussian prior on slopes, but in
this case it's it's an easy thing to
think through, especially in terms of of
approximation.
Um but it's between zero and one because
of the measurement scales, right? You
think about typical person's weight in
kilograms especially in the Kalahari in
the 1960 and a typical person's height
in centimeters the weight in kilograms
is smaller
and then sigma just has to be positive
and I give it a wide uniform
distribution um these are first
conjectures to understand them we're
going to push them out of the model into
a prior predictive distribution
um which means taking that simulation
function we wrote earlier or any code
that you like that'll simulate weights
and just sampling from these
distributions for the variables and syn
making synthetic people from it and
putting it out. I'm going to simulate
some lines. Okay. U to give you uh some
intuition about this. So just for some
uh uh any old linear regression focusing
only on the intercept and slope. The
intercept is alpha. I don't think I said
that before or did I? I think I did.
Yeah. So the intercept means alpha. Uh
slope means beta. And here I've used two
normal priors just uh for the symmetry
of uh and the aesthetic pleasure of the
illustration. And what I'm doing these
three colored balls are random samples
from the prior. This is just the prior
before there's any data in this two
dimensional space. So that's like a hill
that you're looking at, right? The
center is the top of this twodimensional
Gaussian hill. Those are the most
plausible values and the balls are are
samples from that. So they tend to stay
near the middle where it's more
plausible, but they occasionally sample
from the fringes.
Does this make some sense? Yeah. Is this
pleasurable to watch? You could spend
hours
>> alpha and sigma.
>> Uh sigma is not shown. That'd be the
third dimension. The the the balls are
just independent samples from the prior.
They're different realizations. And the
animations is just I I they move to a
spot and then I sample another one and
it goes there and and red, blue and cyan
are just independent samples,
right? It's just a the the posterior
distribution is full of values and as we
sample from them, it's like the the
colors are different people who are
taking random samples in a sequence and
the movements are the sequential values
that they sample. Yeah. Question.
>> I find it hard to understand the
implications of this for the model.
>> Yeah. Well, that will come hopefully in
the next few slides. Yeah. Okay. Um, so
what does this mean then? Uh, this
distribution, this hill is actually full
of lines because any point on this hill
defines a line, right? Because it's a
combination of an intercept and a slope.
So now I can show you the lines in the
xy space. This is for n equals 0 because
there's no data yet. This is just the
prior. But the prior is full of lines.
Yeah, sometimes very bad lines in this
case because I have not constrained the
slope to be positive. And so the prior
here is perfectly happy to sample
situations where you get lighter as you
get taller.
Yeah, that's a very vague prior. Now,
that's a fine prior in in this case.
It'll work fine. We have lots of data.
You'll get the right answer anyway. But
I just want you to think through the
scientific logic of the constraints you
put on these things. Um, so the this
will come back like why have I chosen
three? Because I wanted you to see three
lines at the same time. So I need to be
sampling three points at the same time.
And so those where those points are
define where the lines are on the right.
These are synchronized, I think. Yeah, I
think they are.
You can stare at it and let me know.
Yeah. Does this make better sense now?
Yeah. Okay.
>> Yes.
>> I'm very sorry. The random independent
sample is bouncing around and each I'm
taking a new sample.
>> Yes.
>> And at each sort of time frame where
they sort of slightly pause taking the
sample.
>> That's the sample it was moving to and
I've just done an interpolation so it
jogs across.
>> We don't care about the things are
happening in the transition.
>> Um well you do in a sense because there
are also lines and the line is moving
too. It's just I'm just taking random
spots to cruise around and do journeys
in this space to illustrate the the
relationship between the parameter
values and the predictive space. So this
is a prior predictive distribution
because the lines give you predicted
expectations. The expectation is the
prediction and but the model the
posterior distribution well the prior
rather is that thing on the left. And so
what the prior means is not clear at all
as the question uh noted from the left
but hopefully it's more clear from the
right and that's all I want you to get
from this.
>> Well what are the axises on the right?
>> The x would well I made them x and y to
make this a bit anonymous but the x
would be height and y would be weight.
Okay
>> that's what I assume but
>> okay
>> so if you had x and y maybe you were
doing something else
>> I could be but I'm not in this case.
Okay. Um, we're out of time. So, let me
show you where we're going to go from
here. We're going to do uh we're going
to update with data. So, now as we layer
in point by point, remember basian
updating works point by point. We can
constrain the posterior distribution and
it gets smaller and smaller. There's a
narrower and narrower range of
intercepts and slopes that are
consistent with the data and the lines
get more and more stable on the right.
And that's how linear regression works
as Gaus envisioned it. Yeah. Um when you
come back next time, we will pick up
exactly from here because we remember
we've gotten through to the we've done
the prior predictive simulation. We have
a method of approximating the posterior
now to do this with the data. So we're
going to put the data into our estimator
and then we're going to push out
predictions and interpret them. All
right. Uh and thank you for your
attention and I'll see you next time.